Implementing base models/adapters for Nautobot side functionality. (#153)
nautobot/nautobot-plugin-ssot: docs/user/developing_jobs.md

Familiarity with [DiffSync](https://diffsync.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and with developing [Nautobot Jobs](https://nautobot.readthedocs.io/en/latest/additional-features/jobs/) is recommended.

## Quickstart Example

The following code presents a minimum viable example for syncing VLANs from a remote system into Nautobot. You will have to adapt the following things to make this work for your use case:

- Swap out any mention of a "remote system" for your actual remote system, such as your IPAM tool
- Implement any models that you need, unless you are actually only interested in VLAN data
- Your `load` function in the remote adapter will probably be a little harder to implement, check the example integrations in this repository (under `nautobot_ssot/integrations`)

It contains 3 steps:

- Data modeling
- Adapters
    - Nautobot
    - Remote
- Nautobot Job

```python
# example_ssot_plugin/jobs.py
from typing import Optional

from diffsync import DiffSync
from nautobot.ipam.models import VLAN
from nautobot.extras.jobs import Job
from nautobot_ssot.contrib import NautobotModel, NautobotAdapter
from nautobot_ssot.jobs import DataSource

> from remote_system import APIClient  # This is only an example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from . import DictionaryAsAnAPIClient
```

Reviewer: The thought is to couple this with a dictionary to be an actual usable example. 

e.g. 

```python
# sot_file.py

DictionaryAsAnAPIClient = {} # actual testable data.
```

    This example is a brief as it is because usage of the `NautobotModel` class provides `create`, `update` and `delete` out of the box for the `VLANModel`. If you want to sync data _from_ Nautobot to another remote system, you will need to implement those yourself. For examples, check out the existing integrations under `nautobot_ssot/integrations`

The following sections describe the individual steps in more detail.

### Step 1 - Defining the Models

The models use diffsync, which in turn uses [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for its data modeling. Nautobot SSoT comes with a set of classes out of the box that implement a lot of functionality for you automatically using the classes from `nautobot_ssot.contrib`, provided you adhere to a set of rules.

The first rule is to define your models tightly after the Nautobot models themselves. Example:

```python
from nautobot.tenancy.models import Tenant
from nautobot_ssot.contrib import NautobotModel

class TenantModel(NautobotModel):
    """An example model of a tenant."""
    _model = Tenant
    _modelname = "tenant"
    _identifiers = ("name",)
    _attributes = ("description",)

    name: str
    description: str
```

> As you can see when looking at the source code of the `nautobot.tenancy.models.Tenant` model, the fields on the model (`name` and `description`) match the names of the fields on that model exactly. This enables the base class `NautobotModel` to dynamically load, create, update and delete your tenants without you needing to implement this functionality yourself.

Author: Provided a link, thanks!

The above example shows the simplest field type (an attribute on the model), however, to build a production implementation you will need to understand how to identify different variants of fields by following the [modeling docs](modeling.md).

### Step 2.1 - Creating the Nautobot Adapter

Having created all your models, creating the Nautobot side adapter is very straight-forward:

```python
from nautobot_ssot.contrib import NautobotAdapter

> from your_ssot_app.models import DiffSyncDevice, DiffSyncPrefix, DiffSyncIPAddress

Author: Good catch, thanks!

class NautobotAdapter(NautobotAdapter):
    top_level = ("device", "prefix")

    device = DiffSyncDevice
    prefix = DiffSyncPrefix
    ip_address = DiffSyncIPAddress  # Not in the `top_level` tuple, since it's a child of the prefix model
```

> The `load` function is already implemented on this adapter and will automatically and recursively traverse any children relationships for you, provided the models are defined correctly.

Author: Yes!

### Step 2.2 - Creating the Remote Adapter

Regardless of which direction you are synchronizing data in, you need to write the `load` method for the remote adapter yourself. You can find many examples of how this can be done in the `nautobot_ssot.integrations` module, which contains pre-existing integrations with remote systems.

!!! note

> As the features in `nautobot_ssot.contrib` are still very new, most existing integrations do not use them.

Reviewer 2: I feel like we should at least be updating the Example Job to utilize the Mixin since it's supposed to represent our recommendation around how to create an SSoT App.

> As the features in `nautobot_ssot.contrib` are still very new, most existing integrations do not use them.

Author: I have done this for the example integration, added a link here.

> As the features in `nautobot_ssot.contrib` are still very new, most existing integrations do not use them.

Author: Not a link but a reference rather

### Step 3 - The Job

Develop a Job class, derived from either the `nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSource` or `DataTarget` classes provided by this plugin, and implement the adapters to populate the self.source_adapter and self.target_adapter that are used by the built-in implementation of sync_data. This sync_data method is an opinionated way of running the process including some performance data, more in next section, but you could overwrite it completely or any of the key hooks that it calls.

The methods [`calculate_diff`][nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSyncBaseJob.calculate_diff] and [`execute_sync`][nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSyncBaseJob.calculate_diff] are both implemented by default, using the data that is loaded into the adapters through the respective methods. Note that `execute_sync` will _only_ execute when dry-run is set to false.

> Optionally, on your Job class, also implement the [`lookup_object`][nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSyncBaseJob.calculate_diff], [`data_mapping`][nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSyncBaseJob.calculate_diff], and/or [`config_information`][nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSyncBaseJob.config_information] APIs (to provide more information to the end user about the details of this Job), as well as the various metadata properties on your Job's Meta inner class. Refer to the example Jobs provided in this plugin for examples and further details.

Reviewer 2: Are the `lookup_object`, `data_mapping`, and `config_information` intended to be links? If so, then they should be wrapped in paranthesis. Also, it appears you use calculate_diff twice. Regarding Glenn's point, it might be best to instead use a permalink to the part of the code being referenced?

## Quickstart

As a general overview, here are the different things to be done to have a functioning SSoT job:

1. Define the base models that define the data contract
2. Implement the Nautobot adapter automatically through `nautobot_ssot.contrib.BaseAdapter`

> 3. If Nautobot is the source of the job implement `create`, `update`, `delete` methods for the models in the remote system

Author: I re-worded this entirely, this should be better now.

> 4. Implement the remote adapters `load` method, responsible for loading the data from the remote system into the adapter 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Implement the adapters `load` method for the non Nautobot targets, responsible for loading the data from the remote system into the adapter 
```

5. Putting it together into a job

### Defining the Models

> The models use diffsync, which in turn uses [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for its data modelling. Nautobot SSoT comes with a set of classes out of the box that implement a lot of functionality for you automatically using the classes from `nautobot_ssot.contrib`, provided you adhere to a set of rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The models use diffsync, which in turn uses [pydantic](https://docs.pydantic.dev/latest/) for its data modeling. Nautobot SSoT comes with a set of classes out of the box that implement a lot of functionality for you automatically using the classes from `nautobot_ssot.contrib`, provided you adhere to a set of rules.
```

The first rule is to define your models tightly after the Nautobot models themselves. Example:

```python
from nautobot.tenancy.models import Tenant
from nautobot_ssot.contrib import NautobotModel

class TenantModel(NautobotModel):
    """An example model of a tenant."""
    _model = Tenant
    _modelname = "tenant"
    _identifiers = ("name",)
    _attributes = ("description",)

    name: str
    description: str
```

> As you can see when looking at the source code of the `nautobot.tenancy.models.Tenant` model, the fields on the model (`name` and `description`) match the names of the fields on that model one-to-one. This enables the base class `NautobotModel` to dynamically load, create, update and delete your tenants without you needing to implement this functionality yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see when looking at the source code of the `nautobot.tenancy.models.Tenant` model, the fields on the model (`name` and `description`) match the names of the fields on that model exactly. This enables the base class `NautobotModel` to dynamically load, create, update and delete your tenants without you needing to implement this functionality yourself.
```

Reviewer: one-to-one is a term used in django orm and databases, my mind goes to that definition.

Reviewer 3: why if I want to reimplement the functionality to add some customization? maybe a note to show that this is possible?

> For a full how-to on modelling different kinds of fields, check the corresponding [page](modelling.md) in the docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above example shows the simplest field type (an attribute on the model), however, to build a production implementation you will need to understand how to identify different variants of fields by following the [modeling docs](modeling.md).
```

Reviewer: english spelling is modeling, will need to adjust the filename to match.

### Creating the Nautobot Adapter

Having created all your models, creating the Nautobot side adapter is very straight-forward:

```python
from nautobot_ssot.contrib import BaseAdapter

from your_ssot_app.models import DiffSyncDevice, DiffSyncPrefix, DiffSyncIPAddress

class NautobotAdapter(BaseAdapter):
    top_level = ("device", "prefix")

    device = DiffSyncDevice
    prefix = DiffSyncPrefix

>     ip_address = DiffSyncIPAddress  # Not in top_level because it's a child of the prefix model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ip_address = DiffSyncIPAddress  # Not in the `top_level` tuple, since it's a child of the prefix model
```

```

> The `load` function is already implemented on this adapter and will automatically and recursively traverse any children relationships for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `load` function is already implemented on this adapter and will automatically and recursively traverse any children relationships for you, provided the models are defined correctly.
```

### Implementing `create`, `update` and `delete`

> In case you are synchronizing data _to_ and not _from_ Nautobot, you can entirely skip this step. The `nautobot_ssot.contrib.NautobotModel` class takes care of automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are synchronizing data _to_ Nautobot and not _from_ Nautobot, you can entirely skip this step. The `nautobot_ssot.contrib.NautobotModel` class provides this functionality automatically.
```

If you need to perform the `create`, `update` and `delete` operations on the remote system however, it will be up to you to implement those on your model.

!!! note

>     You still want your models to adhere to the [modelling guide](modelling.md), because doing so gives you the auto-generated `load` function for the diffsync adapter on the Nautobot side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You still want your models to adhere to the [modeling guide](modeling.md), since it provides you the auto-generated `load` function for the diffsync adapter on the Nautobot side.
```

### Loading from the Remote System

Regardless of which direction you are synchronizing data in, you need to write the `load` method for the remote adapter yourself. You can find many examples of how this can be done in the `nautobot_ssot.integrations` module, which contains pre-existing integrations with remote systems.

!!! note

>     As the features in `nautobot_ssot.contrib` are still very new, these existing integrations won't necessarily use them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    As the features in `nautobot_ssot.contrib` are still very new, most existing integrations do not use them.
```

### Putting it Together in a Job

> Develop a Job class, derived from either the `nautobot_ssot.jobs.base.DataSource` or `DataTarget` classes provided by this plugin, and implement the adapters to populate the self.source_adapter and self.target_adapter that are used by the built-in implementation of sync_data. This sync_data method is an opinionated way of running the process including some performance data, more in next section, but you could overwrite it completely or any of the key hooks that it calls:

Reviewer: I have trouble following this one, mind taking another crack at it?

```
def load_source_adapter(self):
    """Method to instantiate and load the SOURCE adapter into `self.source_adapter`."""
    self.source_adapter = NautobotRemote(url=self.kwargs["source_url"], token=self.kwargs["source_token"], job=self)
    self.source_adapter.load()
```

```python
def load_target_adapter(self):
   """Method to instantiate and load the TARGET adapter into `self.target_adapter`."""
   self.target_adapter = NautobotLocal(job=self)
   self.target_adapter.load()
```

> The methods `calculate_diff` and `execute_sync` are both implemented be default, using the data that is loaded into the adapters through the respective methods. Note that `execute_sync` will _only_ execute when dry-run is set to false.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The methods `calculate_diff` and `execute_sync` are both implemented by default, using the data that is loaded into the adapters through the respective methods. Note that `execute_sync` will _only_ execute when dry-run is set to false.
```

> Optionally, on your Job class, also implement the `lookup_object`, `data_mapping`, and/or `config_information` APIs (to provide more information to the end user about the details of this Job), as well as the various metadata properties on your Job's Meta inner class. Refer to the example Jobs provided in this plugin for examples and further details.

Reviewer 3: maybe a link to docs about these methods?
